Symptoms
Seedling wilt or kresek
Observed 1-3 weeks after transplanting
Green water-soaked layer along the cut portion or leaf tip of leaves as early symptom
Leaves wilt and roll up and become grayish green to yellow
Entire plant wilt completely

Leaf blight
Water-soaked to yellowish stripes on leaf blades or starting at leaf tips with a wavy margin
Leaves with undulated yellowish white or golden yellow marginal necrosis, drying of leaves back from tip and curling, leaving mid rib intact are the major symptoms.
Appearance of bacterial ooze that looks like a milky or opaque dewdrop on young lesions early in the morning
Severely infected leaves tend to dry quickly
loss in grain yield may be up to 60%.

Confirmation
To distinguish kresek symptoms from stem borer damage, the lower end of the infected seedling can be squeezed between the fingers.
Yellowish bacterial ooze may be seen coming out of the cut ends.
The cut portion can be observed against the light to see the bacterial ooze streaming out from the cut ends into the water.
After 1-2 hours, the water becomes turbid.

Identification of pathogen
The bacteria causing the disease are rods, 1.2 x 0.3-0.5 µm. They are single, occasionally in pairs but not in chains.
They are Gram negative, non-spore-forming, and devoid of capsules.
Their colonies on nutrient agar are pale yellow, circular, and smooth with an entire margin. They are convex and viscid.

Factors favouring disease development
presence of weeds
presence of rice stubbles and ratoons of infected plants
presence of bacteria in the rice paddy and irrigation canals
warm temperature(25-30° C), high humidity, rain and deep water.
Severe winds, which cause wounds, and over fertilization are suitable factors for the development of the disease.
Irrigation water and splashing or windblown rain can disseminate the bacterium from plant to plant.
The use of trimming tools for transplanting and by handling during transplanting can also trigger new infection.

Management Strategies
Preventive method
Seed treatment with bleaching powder (100g/l) and zinc sulfate (2%) reduce bacterial blight.
Seed treatment - seed soaking for 8 hours in Agrimycin (0.025%) and wettable ceresan (0.05%) followed by hot water treatment for 30 min at 52-54oC;
seed soaking for 8 hours in ceresan (0.1%) and treat with Streptocyclin (3g in 1 litre);
Spray neem oil 3% or NSKE 5%
Spray fresh cowdung extract for the control of bacterial blight. Dissolve 20 g cowdung in one litre of water; allow to settle and sieve. Use supernatant liquid.

Cultural methods
Grow Tolerant varieties (IR 20 IR 72, PONMANI, TKM 6).
Secure disease free seed
Grow nurseries preferably in isolated upland conditions
Avoid clipping of seedlings during transplanting.
Balanced fertilization, avoid excess N - application
Skip N - application at booting (if disease is moderate)
Drain the field (except at flowering stage of the crop)
Destruction of weeds and collateral hosts
Avoid flow of water from affected fields
Maintain proper plant spacing

Chemical methods
Spray Streptomycin sulphate + Tetracycline combination 300 g + Copper oxychloride 1.25kg/ha. If necessary repeat 15 days later.
Application of bleaching powder @ 5 kg/ha in the irrigation water is recommended in the kresek stage.
Foliar spray with copper fungicides alternatively with Streptocyclin (250 ppm) to check secondary spread.
