Symptoms
Initially, small, dark-green and water-soaked streaks on interveins from tillering to booting stage
The progress of the streaks is longitudinal, limited by the veins and soon turn yellow or orange brown.
All along the streaks bacterial exudates could be observed as tiny yellow or amber colored droplets.
These streaks may coalesce to form large patches and cover the entire leaf surface.
Lesions turn brown to greyish white then dry when disease is severe
Infection in the florets and seeds results in brown or black discoloration and death of ovary, stamens and endosperm and browning of glumes.

Identification of pathogen
The bacteria causing the disease X. oryzae pv.oryzicola occur as rods.
The bacteria have no spores and no capsules.
They move with the aid of a single polar flagellum.
They are Gram-negative and aerobic and can grow favorably at 28 °C.
The bacterial colonies on nutrient agar are pale yellow, circular, smooth, convex, and viscid and have an entire margin.

Factors favoring disease development
Presence of the bacteria on leaves and in the water or those surviving in the debris left after harvest
Warm temperature and high humidity
Early stage of planting from maximum tillering to panicle initiation

Management Strategies
The disease can be controlled by proper application of fertilizers and proper plant spacing, use of resistant varieties, and hot water treated seeds.
Practicing field sanitation is important.
Ratoons, straws and volunteer seedlings left after harvest can be destroyed to minimize the initial inoculum at the beginning of the season.
Providing good drainage system especially in seedbeds can also manage this disease.
Planting of resistant varieties (IR 20, TKM 6) is the most effective method of controlling bacterial leaf streak.
Grow nurseries preferably in isolated upland conditions
Avoid clipping of seedlings during transplanting.
Spray fresh cowdung water extract or lemon grass or mint extract at 20%.
Spraying streptomycin sulphate and tetracycline combination 300g +copper oxychloride 1.25 kg/ha.
