Symptoms
All aboveground parts of the rice plant (leaves, leaf collar, culm, culm nodes, neck, and panicle) are attacked by the fungus.
Initial symptoms are white to gray-green lesions or spots with brown borders.
Small specks originate on leaves, subsequently enlarge into spindle shaped spots (0.5 to 1.5cm length, 0.3 to 0.5cm width) with ashy center.
Older lesions are elliptical or spindle-shaped and whitish to gray with necrotic borders. Several spots coalesce to form big irregular patches.
Nodal infection causes the culm to break at the infected node.
Lesions on the neck are grayish brown and causes the girdling of the neck and the panicle to fall over.
If infection of the neck occurs before milk stage, no grain is formed, but if infection occurs later, grains of poor quality are formed.

Leaf Blast
Severe cases of infection - entire crop gives a blasted or burnt appearance - hence the name "BLAST"
Severe cases - lodging of crop (after ear emergence)

Neck Blast
Neck region of panicle develops a black color and shrivels completely/partially, grain set inhibited, panicle breaks at the neck and hangs.

Nodal Blast
Nodes become black and break up.

Identification of pathogen
This disease is caused by a fungus named Pyricularia orizae, which overwinters in rice seeds and infected rice stubble.
Spores from infections can spread by wind to other rice plants over great distances.

Favourable conditions
Presence of the blast spores in the air throughout the year
Upland rice environment and high elevation in the tropics
Cloudy skies, frequent rain, and drizzles
High nitrogen levels like ammonium sulfate
High relative humidity (90% and higher) and wet leaves
Temperature from 25-28°C

Management Strategies
Cultural methods
Planting resistant varieties against the rice blast is the most practical and economical way of controlling rice blast.
Use of tolerant varieties (CO 47, CO 50, ADT 36, ADT 37, ASD 16, ASD 20, ADT 39, ASD 19, TPS 3, White ponni, ADT 44, BPT 5204, IR-64, IR-36, Jaya)
Avoid excess N - fertilizer application
Apply nitrogen in three split doses.
Remove weed hosts from bunds.

Chemical methods
Seed treatment at 2.0 g/kg seed with Captan or Carbendazim or Thiram or Tricyclazole.
Systemic fungicides such as pyroquilon and tricyclazole are possible chemicals for controlling the disease.
Spraying of Tricyclazole at 1g/lit of water or Edifenphos at 1 ml/lit of water or Carbendazim at 1.0 gm/lit.
3 to 4 sprays each at nursery, tillering stage and panicle emergence stage may be required for complete control.
