Symptoms
Brown Spot is called as sesame leaf spot or Helminthosporiose or fungal blight.
The fungus attacks the crop from seedling in nursery to milk stage in main field.
The disease appears first as minute brown dots, later becoming cylindrical or oval to circular (resemble sesame seed).
Spots measure 0.5 to 2.0mm in breadth, coalesce to form large patches.
Then several spots coalesce and the leaf dries up.
Infection also occurs on panicle, neck with brown colour appearance.
Seeds also infected (black or brown spots on glumes, spots are covered by olivaceous velvety growth).
The seedlings die and affected nurseries can be often recognized from a distance by their brownish scorched appearance.
Dark brown or black spots also appear on glumes.
The infection of the seed causes failure of seed germination, seedling mortality and reduces the grain quality and weight.
50% yield reduction in severe cases.

Mode of spread and survival
The infected seeds are the most common source of primary infection.
The fungus also survives on collateral hosts. The fungus can survive in the seed for more than 4 years.
The disease is common in nutrient-deficient soils and unflooded soil but rare on rice grown on fertile soils.

Identification of pathogen
Brown Spot: Helminthosporium oryzae - FUNGAL DISEASE (Syn: Drechslera oryzae)

Favourable conditions
Temperature of 25-30°C
Relative humidity above 80 per cent.
Excess of nitrogen aggravates the disease incidence.
Leaves must be wet for 8-24 hours for infection to occur.

Management Strategies
Cultural methods
As disease is seed borne, use disease free seeds.
Removal of alternate and collateral hosts.
Growing resistant varieties like ADT 44, PY 4, CORH 1, CO 44, CAUVERY, BHAVANI, TPS 4 and Dhanu.
Providing proper nutrition for optimum plant growth and prevention of water stress.
Soils known to be low in plant-available silicon should be amended with calcium silicate slag before planting.

Chemical methods
Seed soak/seed treatment with Captan or Thiram at 2.0g/kg of seed.
Spray Mancozeb (2.0g/lit) or Edifenphos (1ml/lit) 2 to 3 times at 10-15 day intervals.
Seed treatment with tricyclazole followed by spraying of mancozeb + tricyclazole at tillering and late booting stages gave good control of the disease.
