Tungro Disease

Symptoms
Plants affected by tungro exhibit stunting and reduced tillering. Their leaves become yellow or orange-yellow, may also have rust-colored spots.
Discoloration begins from leaf tip and extends down to the blade or the lower leaf portion.
Delayed flowering - panicles small and not completely exerted.
Most panicles sterile or partially filled grains.
Tungro virus disease affects all growth stages of the rice plant specifically the vegetative stage.

Special detection technique
Collect leaf samples at 6 a.m.
The top 10 cm portion of the leaf is immersed in a solution containing 2 g of iodine and 6 g of potassium iodide in 100 ml of water for 15 minutes.
Washed in water and when examined: Tungro infected leaves develop dark blue streaks.

Identification of pathogen
Tungro virus disease is transmitted by leafhoppers, wherein the most efficient vector is the green leafhopper, Nephotettix virescens (Distant). The disease complex is associated with rice tungro bacilliform virus (RTBV) and rice tungro spherical virus (RTSV). RTBV cannot be transmitted by leafhoppers unless RTSV is present.

Factors favouring disease development
Presence of the virus sources.
Presence of the vector.
Age and susceptibility of host plants.
All growth stages of the rice plant specifically the vegetative stage.

Management Strategies
Trap methods
Light traps are to be set up to attract and control the leaf hopper vectors as well as to monitor the population.
In the early morning, the population of leafhopper alighting near the light trap should be killed by spraying/dusting the insecticides.

Cultural methods
Planting of resistant varieties against tungro virus disease is the most economical means of managing the disease.
Use Resistant varieties like IR 36, IR 50, ADT 37, Ponmani, Co 45, Co 48, Surekha, Vikramarya.
Among the cultural management practices, adjusting the date of planting is recommended.
Observing a fallow period of at least a month to eliminate hosts and viruses and vectors of the disease.
In epidemic areas follow rotation with pulses or oil seeds.
Ploughing and harrowing the field to destroy stubbles right after harvest in order to eradicate other tungro hosts.
Destruction of weed hosts on bunds.

Chemical methods
Leaf yellowing can be minimized by spraying 2% urea mixed with Mancozeb at 2.5 gm/lit.
Green leaf hoppers as vectors are to be controlled effectively in time by spraying.
Spray insecticides twice, 15 and 30 days after transplanting.
Spray two rounds of Fenthion 100 EC (40 ml/ha) 15 and 30 days after transplanting.
Maintain 2.5 cm of water in the nursery and broadcast Carbofuran 3G 3.5 kg (or) Phorate 10G 1.0 kg (or) Quinalphos 5G 2.0 kg.
